*Paranoia xp* was designed by Allen Varney and is published by Mongoose Publishing.
It is derived from the original *Paranoia* game, which was first published by West End
Games in 1984 and was designed by Dan Gelber, Greg Costikyan, and Eric Goldberg.
It is a comical game set in the “Alpha Complex” in a nightmarish bureaucratic future
where everyone truly is “out to get you.” Alpha Complex is dispassionately run by The
Computer whose primary function is to ensure the happiness and well-being of
everyone under its control. Unfortunately, The Computer is a few diodes short of a
radio. It believes there are traitors, mutant traitors, and Commie bastard traitors living
amongst the loyal citizens of Alpha Complex that must be dealt with. That is, killed.
As a newly appointed member of the elite Troubleshooters, it is your job to root out and
destroy all traitors. The trouble is, you are one yourself. In *Paranoia xp*, Death is
overworked and cloning technology is state-of-the-art. Characters drop like peanut
shells in a circus tent, but replacement clones appear within minutes.

### RPG Design Patterns Identified

[:pattern:Attribute](/pattern/Attribute), [:pattern:Game Master](/pattern/Game Master), [:pattern:Generalized Contest](/pattern/Generalized Contest), [:pattern:Last Man Standing](/pattern/Last Man Standing), [:pattern:Rank](/pattern/Rank), [[:pattern:Recycled
Fortune]] (“Conflict Roll,” “Tension Roll”), [:pattern:Resource](/pattern/Resource), [:pattern:Skill](/pattern/Skill), [:pattern:Structured Session](/pattern/Structured Session), [[:pattern:Trauma
Gauge]]

### Character Makeup

All new characters are Troubleshooters. Troubleshooters are granted “Red” clearance.
This is much better than the “Infrared” clearances possessed in their former meaningless
pre-game lives and is an indication of how much The Computer trusts the characters in
their new meaningless in-game lives.

{{ :game:paranoia-xp.png}}
Questions about character design are of the highest
classification level: “Ultraviolet.” Attempting to
access information above your classification level is
treasonous. Only the Game Master and High
Programmers are classification level Ultraviolet. If
you are of a lower classification level and are reading
this description of Paranoia xp’s Character Makeup,
you are obviously a traitor. Kindly proceed to the armory and requisition an XJ7-5
repeating blaster pistol by filling out form G237-9Q/B in triplicate. Once the XJ7-5
repeating blaster pistol is obtained, place the muzzle to your temple and pull the trigger.
Failure to comply proves your treasonous nature and is grounds for summary execution.
Note: For your protection and well-being, the XJ7-5 repeating blaster pistol possesses a
safety mechanism covering the trigger to prevent accidental discharge. Only citizens
possessing security level “Green” and above may remove this mechanism,
demonstrating how much The Computer values your safety and health. You should
always trust The Benevolent Computer.

Since you have read this far, you clearly must have Ultraviolet clearance. Very well.
*Paranoia xp* character stats are generated by the Game Master and are never revealed to
players. Characters all have two primary attributes. These are “Access” and “Power.”
Power is determined by rolling 1d20. If a value less than 8 is rolled, Power is set to 8.
Power is a gauge of the character’s skill in using his mutant power. Yes, all characters
are mutants. Yes, mutants are traitors. Yes, it is the duty of all characters to kill
traitors, but *only* if they have sufficient proof of the traitor’s treasonous activities. The
Access attribute always starts at 1. It is a gauge of how well the character can “work
the system” to get what he needs or wants. It also acts as a form of “Treason Armor”
that reduces the harsh punishments meted out for the many treasonous actions the
character will undoubtedly perform.

Characters have a resource called Perversity Points. Perversity Points can be spent to
improve the odds of success in conflicts. The points are the primary reward of the game
because, aside from their money, they are the only points players (supposedly) know
about.

Finally, characters have a “Condition” attribute which takes on the values of “Okay,”
“Snafued,” “Wounded,” “Maimed,” “Down,” “Killed,” or “Vaporized.” Each of these
states corresponds to various detrimental effects which generally involve the inability to
spend Perversity Points for a time. The character’s condition thus follows the Trauma
Gauge Design Pattern. However, it does not act as a form of hit points because various
injuries are not cumulative. If a character sustains two lacerations rated at the Wounded
level, the character is still just Wounded. In addition, a character can be Maimed or
even Down without having first been Snafued. The only real difference between Killed
and Vaporized is the entertainment value.

### Conflict System

{{ :game:paranoia-xp2.png}}
Attribute and skill rolls are performed
by rolling a d20 and comparing it to a
threshold. If the roll results in a value
less than or equal to the threshold, the
roll succeeds. Otherwise it fails. The
difference between the roll and the
threshold is called the “margin.” The
margin determines how well the
character succeeded or how badly he
bungled his action. By default, the
threshold is set to equal the attribute
value or skill rank pertinent to the
action. However, players can modify
the threshold or the thresholds of others by spending Perversity Points, if the GM allows
it. Modifications can be both positive and negative.

If one character pits his attributes or skills against another, an opposed roll results.
Each side of the contest rolls a d20 against the pertinent attribute value or skill rank
used. The side with the higher successful margin wins. If neither side succeeds or the
margins are equal, nobody wins. The contest can continue with another roll if the GM
deems it so.

Physical attacks of all forms use the “Violence” skill. If such an attack is successful,
the target sustains damage according to the type of weapon used. Each weapon has a
minimum and a maximum damage value. It also has a “Boost” value. The margin of
the attack is divided by the Boost value and rounded down. The result is added as a
damage bonus to the weapon’s minimum damage. If this value exceeds the weapon’s
maximum damage, the result is set at the maximum damage value instead. Armor can
reduce this value.

{{ :game:paranoia-xp3.png }}

Contests involving treasonous accusations work in exactly the same way as physical
attacks, except the “Management” skill is used in place of the Violence skill. Different
kinds of accusations inflict different amounts of “Treason Damage,” which results in
various “condition” levels similar in effect to those for physical wounds: “Okay,”
“Probation,” “Censure,” “Medication,” “Brainscrub,” “Termination,” and “Erasure.”

As an optional rule, a GM may decide to drain points from character attributes when
they succeed in using those attributes. So, if a character manages to use his mutant
power, he may lose Power points. To thumb its nose at “justice,” the game suggests
that low margins, which result in slight successes, should cost more than spectacular
victories. That way, if a character is on a roll, he will continue in that fashion. But, if
he achieves only minor wins he will spiral down until he continually fails at everything
he attempts. To quote the game text: “…That’s life in Alpha Complex…” Characters
recover lost attribute points over time. If this optional rule is used, Power and Access
act as Resource Attributes.

Each scene has a “Tension Level,” which determines the odds of someone witnessing a
treasonous act. Higher clearance level areas naturally warrant more cameras and more
sophisticated monitoring equipment, so The Computer is more likely to observe
characters in those areas. Due to this, the location in which a scene occurs determines
the tension level, which ranges in value from zero (0) to 20. The higher the number, the
more tension exists. So, supply closets, garages, and Red clearance areas warrant low
values. Ultraviolet and Computer Core areas demand high values. True to form, the
most extensive surveillance equipment is positioned in Alpha Complex’s bathrooms.
When a character performs a treasonous action, he makes a contest roll as normal.
After the conflict is resolved, the GM compares the d20 roll (without rolling again) to
the scene’s Tension Level. If the d20 roll is less than or equal to the Tension Level, the
act was witnessed. So, brilliantly successful treasonous acts are almost always
observed.

### Turn Order

In contests involving more than two characters, all players make contest rolls as normal.
The margins determine the degree to which each succeeds or fails in the contest. If the
actions must follow a sequence, events
are ordered by margin values with the
highest margin going first.

{{ :game:paranoia-xp4.png}}

### Reward System

The GM awards a “ration” of “Perversity
Points” at the beginning of every new
scene. They are also handed out to
players for being entertaining, for
betraying other player characters, for
gloating over the betrayal of other player
characters, for brown nosing the GM, and
for whatever the heck the GM wants to
dole them out for. The game text makes the point that the rewards are given to the
player, not to his character. So, when a character dies (not if, but when) the player
retains the points he has accumulated.

