*RIFTS* was written by Kevin Siembieda and is published by Palladium Books, Inc. It is
a game set in a post apocalyptic Earth after nuclear holocaust wiped out billions of
lives. During the conflict, so much psychic energy was supposedly released that the
fabric of space actually tore along the forgotten ley lines of magic. These inter-
dimensional gaps are known as Rifts. They provide the occasional nightmarish horror
passage into our realm. Earth has become a world of potent magic, fantastic monsters,
psychic powers, and high technology.

### RPG Design Patterns Identified

[:pattern:Alignment](/pattern/Alignment), [:pattern:Class](/pattern/Class), [:pattern:Game Master](/pattern/Game Master), [:pattern:Generalized Contest](/pattern/Generalized Contest), [:pattern:Hit Points](/pattern/Hit Points), [:pattern:Last Man Standing](/pattern/Last Man Standing),
[:pattern:Level](/pattern/Level), [:pattern:Race](/pattern/Race), [:pattern:Random Attribute](/pattern/Random Attribute), [:pattern:Skill](/pattern/Skill)

### Character Makeup

*RIFTS* characters have 8 primary attributes of “Intelligence Quotient,” “Mental
Endurance,” “Mental Affinity,” “Physical Strength,” “Physical Prowess,” “Physical
Endurance,” “Physical Beauty,” and “Speed.” Each attribute is generated by rolling
3d6 and summing the values. If the result is a 16, 17, or 18, another d6 is rolled and the
result is added to the total.

{{ :game:rifts.png}}
All items have a hit points-ish resource
known as “Structural Damage Capacity”
(SDC) indicating how much damage is
needed to break it. The SDC of a living
creature must be taken down to zero before
its “Hit Points” are affected. “Hit Points” fits
the definition of the term used in this book.
When hit points drop to zero, the character
begins dying.
The game has a list of 125 skills partitioned
into the various categories of
“Communications,” “Domestic,”
“Electrical,” “Espionage,” “Mechanical,”
“Medical,” “Military,” “Physical,” “Pilot,” “Pilot Related,” “Rogue,” “Science,”
“Technical,” “Weapon Proficiencies,” and “Wilderness.” RIFTS also has 22
“Occupational Character Classes,” including “Borgs,” “Headhunters,” “Vagabonds,”
“Techno-Wizards,” and the like. Each class has attribute requirements that characters
must satisfy to select it. Once taken, the class bestows certain skills on the character.
Classes also provide lists of additional skills from which the player chooses for his
character as he gains levels.

Players must choose from among three alignment categories of “Good,” “Selfish,” and
“Evil” for his character. In each category there are sub-types. From the Good category
a player may choose “Principled” or “Scrupulous.” From the Selfish category, he may
select “Unprincipled,” or “Anarchist.” From the Evil category, he has the options of
“Miscreant,” “Aberrant,” and “Diabolic.” The alignment system has no effect on the
game other than to serve as a general guide on what kinds of actions are appropriate
when role-playing a character.

{{ :game:rifts2.png}}
### Conflict System

RIFTS resolves all combat
conflicts using d20s. If a player
attempts a special action, such as a
“Death Blow” or “Knockout/Stun,”
he must declare his intention
before rolling. Rolls are adjusted
by various factors. These include
“Aimed Shots,” “Automatic
Weapon Bursts,” “Shooting Wild,”
whether the combatant has superior
training in hand-to-hand combat,
his level, etc. If the adjusted roll is
4 or less, the attack misses. Any
value between 5 and the target’s
Armor Rating (AR) indicates the
attack hits, but only does damage
to the opponent’s armor. Any
adjusted roll greater than the
Armor Rating indicates the attack
delivers damage directly to the
target’s SDC and hit points. If a
hit is successful, the target has a
choice of attempting to parry,
dodge, or entangle the attack (Roll another d20 and beat the attack roll). If the defense
is successful, the attack misses.

{{:game:rifts3.png }}
If an attack successfully lands, it delivers damage
according to the type of weapon used. For example, a
“Human Fist” delivers 1d4 damage while a “Bull
Whip” inflicts 1d8 points of damage. High-tech
weapons deliver “Mega-Capacity Damage.” The game
equates each point of Mega-Capacity Damage to 100
points of normal damage. A Short Range Missile with
a Light High-Explosive Warhead delivers 1d4x10
Mega-Damage. In other words, it delivers 1000 to
4000 damage. If damage is delivered via a blunt
attack, the target can attempt to “Roll With The Punch”
(Roll yet another d20 and beat the attack roll). If
successful, this has the effect of reducing the amount of
damage inflicted on the target.

Conflicts involving “Skills” are handled differently, with each skill specifying the
formula to use in determining the character’s chances in using the skill. This formula is
listed as a “Base Skill” rating plus 5% per level. For example, the “Disguise” skill has a
chance of “25% + 5% per level of experience.” The “Base Skill” is an apparently
arbitrary base percentage, presumably based on the inherent difficulty of performing the
skill. So, proficiency in skills cannot be raised as individual ranks, but they do increase
in effectiveness as a character gains experience levels.

{{ :game:rifts4.png}}
### Turn Order

Characters performing “Sneak Attacks” or
“Long Range Attacks” always go first.
Otherwise, initiative is determined by
having both sides in a conflict roll d20s.
The side with the higher result goes first.
Ties are re-rolled. The winning side goes
and then the losing side goes. If either or
both sides have multiple attacks every
round, attacks are exchanged one at a time
back and forth until all attacks are
complete on both sides.

### Reward System

The game rewards characters with experience points for overcoming foes and “good
role-play.” A character’s level is based off of the number of experience points he has
accumulated. Levels are gained at different rates based on experience point tables
provided for each character class.

{{ :game:rifts5.png }}
